William Shakespeare taught us that the little world of the heart is vaster, deeper, and richer than the spaces of astronomy.
I'm Robert McNeil.
A hundred years ago, those words by Ralph Waldo Emerson inspired two Americans to devote their lives to collecting materials on Shakespeare.
The result is the Folger Library in Washington, D.C., one of the greatest living monuments to William Shakespeare.
Henry Clay Folger was a businessman who rose to become chairman of Standard Oil of New York.
His wife, Emily Jordan Folger, was a Shakespearean scholar.
Together, quietly, single-mindedly, they pursued their passion for collecting.
Henry Folger said, I did think of placing the library at Stratford near the bones of the great man himself, but I finally concluded I would give it to Washington, for I am an American.
When it opened in 1932, the magnitude of the Folger's achievement emerged.
The library is an unparalleled resource for scholars.
The range of the collection is enormous,
The letters of John Donne.
Books from the Italian Renaissance and the German Reformation.
A 1478 edition of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales.
In all, a collection covering every field of human endeavor in England and Europe from 1450 to 1700.
But the heart of the collection is the works of Shakespeare.
Perhaps the most valuable single item is this 1594 edition of Titus Andronicus, the only copy known to exist.
These are called first folios, or the first collected edition of Shakespeare's plays, dated 1623.
The Folger Library has 79 copies of the first folio edition.
The British Museum has the second largest collection.
It has five.
works like the tempest would have been lost if shakespeare's fellow actors hadn't published this folio edition seven years after he died to keep the plays alive kiss the book not only a center for scholars the folger library brings the wonder of shakespeare to the public this is a very shallow monster through its theater its music and its exhibits
The Folger Shakespeare Library affirms Henry Folger's belief that Shakespeare and his world are a fundamental part of America's heritage, with a relevance for all men and all time.
Thank you very much.
I'm glad you found bits of Romeo and Juliet amusing.
When I played Romeo at Stratford-upon-Avon, we used to get about 24 laughs during the balcony scene.
No, but they were intentional laughs on our part.
There are all sorts of unsuspected laughs in Shakespeare, and I think you've got to be a bit of a comedian to get away with Hamlet.
I even got some laughs in Macbeth.
Just 40 years after Shakespeare died, there was a very keen theatre-goer keeping a diary.
And that diary has fixed some actors' performances, and here it is, an extract from it, Mr. Samuel Pepys.
To the King's Theatre, and there saw Taming of the Shrew, which hath some very good pieces in it, but generally is but a mean play.
by reason of the words, I suppose, not being understood, at least by me.
To the opera, and there saw Romeo and Juliet, which is a play of itself the worst I ever heard in my life, and the worst acted that I ever saw these people do.
To the Duke's house, and there saw a midsummer night's dream which I had never seen before.
more shall ever again.
But to be fair to Shakespeare and to Pepys, probably the version of the dream that he was seeing was called The Fairy Queen.
It was by Thomas Betterton and had music by Henry Purcell.
You see, even as early as 40 years after Shakespeare's death, theatre people were using Shakespeare for their own purposes, which has continued ever since.
Although Shakespeare is for all time, he is for all time because each generation
find something new in him.
And in the 18th century, who thought, I think, perhaps, that Elizabethan tragedy was a little too messy an art form for their sense of order and taste, Nahum Tate provided a King Lear by Shakespeare in which the old king survived to see Cordelia happily married to Edgar.
And they lived happily ever after right through the 18th century.
The greatest English actor of that time was David Garrick.
great tragedian, great comedian.
He played Nahum Tate's version of King Lear.
He was the actor-manager who brought professional actors back to Stratford-upon-Avon when he had the first festival there in 1764.
And his biographer records for us that, happily for the lovers of Shakespeare, Mr. Garrick restored Macbeth to us in almost the same dress it was left us by the author.
A speech or two which were not conducive to the action he threw out
Scenes that were too long he judiciously pruned.
Very few additions were made.
Although he did compose a pretty long speech for Macbeth when dying, but Mr. Garrick excelled in the convulsive throes and dying agonies and would lose no opportunity to express that skill in that part of his profession.
Tis done!
The scene of life will quickly close
Ambitions, vain, delusive dreams, a flame.
And now I wake to darkness, guilt, and horror.
I cannot bear it.
Let me shake it off.
It will not be my soul is clogged with blood and cannot rise.
I dare not ask for mercy.
Hell drags me down.
I sink.
Oh, my soul's lost forever.
Thank you.
Alas, poor Garrick.
The 20th century, of course, has continued to use or abuse Shakespeare for its own purposes.
Edward Bond wrote his version of Lear.
Bertil Brecht, his of Coriolanus, so did John Osborne.
And where would Tom Stoppard's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern be without Shakespeare's Hamlet?
But that's okay with me, because we know Shakespeare in his own turn had borrowed, is that the polite word, other people's plots for his own.
You know, there'd been the King Lear before he wrote his.
There'd been a Hamlet play and a play about King Henry V.
The 20th century's great contribution to this sort of Shakespeareana has been the Shakespearean musical.
West Side Story is really Romeo and Juliet.
Kiss Me Kate is Taming of the Shrew.
Catch My Soul is Othello.
Boys from Syracuse is Comedy of Errors.
Two Gentlemen of Verona is Two Gentlemen of Verona.
Opera too, Othello, Falstaff, Midsummer Night's Dream.
And ballet, Romeo and Juliet, and even Hamlet.
When Robert Heltman was preparing his ballet of Hamlet, he met another giant of the theatre, Donald Wulfit, who was the last of the great actor-managers who used to tour Britain acting Shakespeare in large theatres, large voice, large gesture, sawing the air too much with his hand, perhaps.
And Donald Wulfit met Robert Heltman in, let us say, the Garrick Club in London and asked him
What are you working at, Bobby, old boy?
Oh, I'm rehearsing my ballet of Hamlet, Donald.
You are going to dance, Hamlet?
Why not, Donald?
You've been singing it for years.
No, no, no, no, no, don't stop.
There's another story from the Garrick Club of an actor recently preparing his own King Lear and asking Sir John Gielgud had he got any tips on playing the part.
Yes, said Gielgud, get a small Cordelia.
Ho, ho, ho.
What is it, you suppose, which connects Richard Burbage, David Garrick, Donald Woolford, John Gielgud and...
other actors like me who managed to earn a living by acting in Shakespeare's plays.
I think it's an undying affection and belief that Shakespeare, more than any other writer who ever lived, understood the complexities of human life, the variety of human beings, and the subtleties that go to make up
our existence.
And for me, those complexities cannot be expressed by the actor unless he has fully understood them in the verse in which they are expressed on the page.
And I thought I'd like to let you into a few of the secrets which I unlocked when I was preparing Macbeth.
And I want to take a speech which is now famous.
But let me first read it in perhaps the accent it was first pronounced
the very first audience who ever heard it in Elizabethan England.
Accents like clothes have fashions and sounds change.
It may have sounded something like this.
She should have died hereafter.
Thou would have been a team for such a war.
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow creeps in this petty pierce from dear to dear to the last syllable of recorded time.
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools the way to dusty death.
Oot, oot, brief candle.
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player that struts and threats his oar upon the stage and then is hard no more.
It is a tale told by an idiot.
full of soon and fury, signifying nothing.
But we can't... Oh, please.
Each speech must be put in the context not only of the scene, but in the context of the whole play.
So young Macbeth arrives back from battle, having single-handedly almost saved Scotland from defeat.
and, like many another successful general, wants to go into professional politics.
He meets three witches who promise him that he can be king of Scotland if only he will kill the present king, Duncan, the good old man, his patron and friend, and urged on by his wife.
He commits the murder, and then there starts the reign of terror, which sends good men into exile, and at this point, at the end of the play, the good men are returning with troops to surround Macbeth,
besieged in his castle where he is bereft of friends and troops.
And at this point, a lone supporter arrives to give him the news that the Queen, my lord, is dead.
And the simplicity of those monosyllables is carried on in the speech which follows.
There is not, I think, in this speech a single word that a child of five, knowing English, couldn't understand.
Macbeth says she should have died hereafter.
She had to die sometime.
At that point, in the little theatre where we first did Macbeth, the other actor would leave the stage, leaving the bare wooden platform such as this, for me to communicate directly with the audience who were around it as you are now.
And I picked someone in the audience with my eye and said, there would have been a time for such a word.
There would have been a time.
Her speech is about time, Macbeth's position in time, and indeed our position too.
There would have been a time for such a word.
What word?
Is that word searching back to the Queen?
Dead?
Died?
Hereafter?
No, I think it's leading on with the tripping of the rhythm of the line.
There would have been a time for such a word, like the ticking of a clock leads on to the next word, which is tomorrow.
And immediately the vowels lengthen and the rhythm slows up.
And tomorrow.
As the repetition of the future.
As a bleak desert of repetitions.
And tomorrow.
You know, if you say a word often enough.
Tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow.
What does the word mean?
Tomorrow, tomorrow.
It has no meaning.
As life is beginning to lose its meaning for Macbeth.
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day.
Today, we've had tomorrow, we've got today.
Two elements of time.
And here's the first image, the first metaphor of the speech.
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day.
That's how the future is proceeding as far as Macbeth can see.
It's the picture here, what, of someone creeping, not with a grandiligant stride, but a little petty pace.
along an Elizabethan street.
There's something mean about it, as there is something mean about life for Macbeth.
How long does this go on?
It goes on to the last syllable of recorded time.
That's how far the tomorrows are going to stretch.
Not to the last word, but to the last syllable of the last word, when the big bang comes and the world ends and all the clocks stop and time is no longer recorded.
What records time?
clocks and bells, syllable of recorded time and all our yesterdays we've had tomorrow we've had today we've now got yesterday is the full complex of time and Macbeth is in that time not only he is but we are all our yesterdays you're beginning to being drawn into Macbeth's predicament
is willing you into it by referring to you.
And what have all our collective experience done?
What's the whole of human experience been about?
It has lighted fools the way to dusty death.
That's what all of our common experience has been about.
Holding up a light, a lantern, a candle to light fools who are going along with petty pace
Village idiots, those sort of fools who tumble into the dust of the unmade road of Elizabethan England.
Fool, of course, has another meaning.
Professional entertainer.
Festy.
King Lear's fool.
Professional stage will be important in a minute, I think, in the speech.
Out, out.
Brief candle.
Try and put a candle out.
Out.
You have to do it twice, don't you?
Brief.
candle life isn't some wonderful roman candle it's not something casting incandescence throughout the universe it's a brief candle it's a penny candle it's the thing you keep in the kitchen drawer for emergencies the cheapest thing in your house Macbeth is saying that's what life is like and that candle has even gone out life he says is but a walking shadow it's not even the candle it's not even it has no substance it's a shadow
There's a phrase in the theatre, walking gentleman.
He's the meanest member of any company.
He plays any old part and gets paid the least amount of money.
Life isn't even a walking gentleman, he's a walking shadow.
And yes, Macbeth is thinking of actors because his next phrase is a poor player.
Life is a poor player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage and then is heard no more.
What life is like an actor, says Macbeth, being played by McKellen, who is an actor.
Life is like me that struts and frets his hour upon the stage, which is what I've been doing all evening during acting Shakespeare.
And then it's heard no more when I go behind the curtain and have never seen again.
I vanish from your sight.
I've been strutting and fretting.
What a way to earn a living, Macbeth is saying.
How despicable acting is.
And Mackellan, who's an actor, is saying that even as he is Macbeth.
And if Macbeth thinks that Mackellan is wasting his time being an actor, what the hell do you think you're doing watching me?
And it's in that way that Shakespeare and Macbeth bring you in to the present tense and don't allow you to think of Macbeth as just a fairy story, something that doesn't really belong to you, because it is Mackellan's predicament and therefore yours, because we are bound together, audience and actor, on a stage.
Life is a tale, a fairy tale, Arabian Nights tale.
It's a tale told by an idiot.
Tomorrow.
And tomorrow, says the village idiot going along the little country lane with petty things.
Full of sound and fury, signifying the blackest, blankest word in the English language
conveying the total emptiness of Macbeth's vision and Macbeth's future and Macbeth's hope.
Nothing.
There is no more pessimistic view of human life than Macbeth has reached at that point in the play.
And me playing Macbeth is not enough for me to come out with some generalized despair.
It must be as particular as
that analysis which I've just given you, not so that I can give a university lecture when I'm acting the part, but so that during rehearsal and in the performance, containing all those ideas in my head, I can filter them through the rest of an actor's accoutrements, my hands, my arms, my legs, my body, my face, my voice.
And like a pianist who appears not only to be putting the music into the piano, but also taking it out,
I am not only Macbeth, I am, in a sense, the man who wrote Macbeth, and it's my privilege in acting Shakespeare for occasionally to understand what it's like to have been Shakespeare.
And now, with your help and imagination, let me put Macbeth's last soliloquy up against others that he has in the play, put it into the context of Macbeth returning from battle, the golden boy, and from that height,
of ecstasy and achievement and optimism.
He falls deeper and deeper and deeper.
Always his imagination alive, always thinking and wondering the pros and cons, the rights and wrongs.
Macbeth's tragedy is that he is a murderer with a conscience.
This supernatural soliciting cannot be ill, cannot be good.
If ill, why has it given me earnest of success, commencing in the truth?
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion whose horrid image doth unfix my hair and make my seated heart knock at my ribs against the use of nature?
Present fears are less than horrible imaginings.
My thought, whose murder yet
is but fantastical shakes, so my single state of magnet function is smothered in some eyes, and nothing is but what is not.
If chance will have me king, why chance may crown me without my stir.
Come what, come may, time and the hour runs through the roughest days.
If it were done when it is done, then, too well, it were done quickly.
If the assassination could tremble up the consequence and catch with his success, that but this blow might be the be-all and the end-all here, but here, upon this bank and shoal of time, we'd jump the life to count.
but in these cases we still have judgment here that we but teach bloody instruction which being taught returns to plague the inventor.
This even-handed justice commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice to our own lips.
He's here in double trust, first as I am his kinsman and his subject, strong both against the deed, then as his host, who should against his murderer shut the door, not bear the knife myself.
This Duncan hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been so clear in his great office that his virtues will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued against the deep damnation of his taking off, and pity like a naked newborn babe striding the blast, or heaven's cherry have been horsed upon the sightless couriers of the air, will blow the horrid deed in every eye, the tears will drown the wind.
I have no spur to prick the side of my intent, but only vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself and falls on the other.
Is this a dagger which has seen before me
the handle toward my hand.
God, let me clutch thee.
Perhaps thee not.
And yet I see thee still.
Art thou not fatal vision, sensible to feeling as to sight, or art thou but a dagger of the mind, a false creation proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
I see thee still in form as palpable as this which now I draw.
Thou marshals me the way that I was going and such an instrument I was to use.
Mine eyes are made the fools of the other senses.
What else worth all the rest?
I see thee still and on thy blade of the dungeon.
Guts of blood which was not so before.
There's no such thing.
It is the bloody business which informs thus to my house.
Now, the one-half world, nature seems dead.
And wicked dreams abuse the curtain's sleep.
Witchcraft celibates pale Hecate's offerings and withered murder, alarmed by his sentinel, the wolf, whose house is watched thus with his stealthy pace.
The Tarquin's ravishing strides toward his design moves like the ghosts.
Thou sure and firm-set earth, fear not my steps which where they walk.
For fear thy very stones prate of my whereabouts, and take this present horror from the time which now suits with it.
As I threat, he lives words to the heat of deeds.
Too cold breath gives I go.
And it is done.
The bell invites me.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell that summons thee to help me.
All to help.
You have scoffed the snake, not killed it.
She'll close and be herself as our poor mammoth remains in danger of her former tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoint and both the world suffer ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep in the affliction of these terrible dreams that shake us nightly.
Better be with the dead whom we to gain our peace have sent to peace than on the torture of the blind to lie in restless ecstasy.
Duncan is in his grave after life's fitful fever.
He sleeps well.
No steel, no poison, malice, domestic, foreign levy, nothing to touch him forever.
I have almost forgot the taste of fears.
The time has been my senses would have cooled to hear a night shriek, and my fell of hair would, at a dismal treatise, rouse and stir as life were in it.
I've supped full with horrors, direness familiar to my slaughterous thoughts, cannot once start me.
Wherefore was that cry?
The queen, my lord, is dead.
They should have died hereafter.
There would have been a time for such a word.
Tomorrow.
And tomorrow.
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day till the last
syllable of recorded time.
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools the way to dusty death.
Out, out, brief cattle.
Life's but a walking shadow.
A poor player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage.
And then is heard no more.
It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.
Our revels now are ended.
These actors, as I foretold you, were all spirits.
and are vanished into air, into thin air, and like the baseless fabric of this vision, the cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, the solemn temples, the great globe itself, yeah, all which it inherits shall dissolve, and like this insubstantial pageant faded.